Specifications/Language/3_Expressions/ComparativeExpressions.md, before:

# Equality Comparison

Equality and inequality comparison is currently limited to the following data types: `Int`, `BigInt`, `Double`, `String`, `Bool`, `Result`, `Pauli`, and `Qubit`. The comparison for equality of arrays, tuples, ranges, user defined types, or callables is currently not supported. 

*__Discussion__*
>In the future, we may support the comparisons of ranges, as well as arrays, tuples, and user defined types, provided their items support comparison. As for all types, the comparison will be by value, meaning two values are considered equal if all of their items are. For values of user defined type, additionally their type also needs to match. Future support for the comparison of values of type `Range` follows the same logic; they should be equal as long as they produce the same sequence of integers, meaning the two ranges 
>```qsharp
>    let r1 = 0..2..5; // generates the sequence 0,2,4
>    let r2 = 0..2..4; // generates the sequence 0,2,4
>```
>should be considered equal.
>
>Conversely, there is a good reason not to allow the comparison of callables as the behavior would be ill-defined. Suppose we will introduce the capability to define functions locally via a possible syntax
>```qsharp
>    let f1 = (x -> Bar(x)); // not yet supported
>    let f2 = Bar;
>```
>for some globally declared function `Bar`. The first line defines a new anonymous function that takes an argument `x` and invokes a function `Bar` with it and assigns it to the variable `f1`. The second line assigns the function `Bar` to `f2`. Since invoking `f1` and invoking `f2` will do the same thing, it should be possible to replace those with each other without changing the behavior of the program. This wouldn't be the case if the equality comparison for functions was supported and `f1 == f2` evaluates to `false`. If conversely `f1 == f2` were to evaluate to `true`, then this leads to the question of determining whether two callable will have the same side effects and evaluate to the same value for all inputs, which is not possible to reliably determine. Therefore, if we would like to be able to replace `f1` with `f2`, we can't allow equality comparisons for callables.  

# Quantitative Comparison

The operators less-than, less-than-or-equal,  greater-than, and greater-than-or-equal define quantitative comparisons. They can only be applied to data types that support such comparisons. As of the time of writing, these are the same data types that can also support arithmetics.

Commit message:

List of all types, default values, and literals (#19)

Specifications/Language/3_Expressions/ComparativeExpressions.md, after:

# Equality Comparison

Equality comparison (`==`) and inequality comparison (`!=`) is currently limited to the following data types: `Int`, `BigInt`, `Double`, `String`, `Bool`, `Result`, `Pauli`, and `Qubit`. The comparison for equality of arrays, tuples, ranges, user defined types, or callables is currently not supported. 

Equality comparison for values of type `Qubit` evaluates whether the two expressions identify the same qubit. There is no notion of a quantum state in Q#; equality comparison in particular does *not* access, measure, or modify the quantum state of the qubits.

Equality comparison for `Double` values may be misleading due to rounding effects.
For instance, the following comparison evaluates to `false` due to rounding errors: `49.0 * (1.0/49.0) == 1.0`.

*__Discussion__*
>In the future, we may support the comparisons of ranges, as well as arrays, tuples, and user defined types, provided their items support comparison. As for all types, the comparison will be by value, meaning two values are considered equal if all of their items are. For values of user defined type, additionally their type also needs to match. Future support for the comparison of values of type `Range` follows the same logic; they should be equal as long as they produce the same sequence of integers, meaning the two ranges 
>```qsharp
>    let r1 = 0..2..5; // generates the sequence 0,2,4
>    let r2 = 0..2..4; // generates the sequence 0,2,4
>```
>should be considered equal.
>
>Conversely, there is a good reason not to allow the comparison of callables as the behavior would be ill-defined. Suppose we will introduce the capability to define functions locally via a possible syntax
>```qsharp
>    let f1 = (x -> Bar(x)); // not yet supported
>    let f2 = Bar;
>```
>for some globally declared function `Bar`. The first line defines a new anonymous function that takes an argument `x` and invokes a function `Bar` with it and assigns it to the variable `f1`. The second line assigns the function `Bar` to `f2`. Since invoking `f1` and invoking `f2` will do the same thing, it should be possible to replace those with each other without changing the behavior of the program. This wouldn't be the case if the equality comparison for functions was supported and `f1 == f2` evaluates to `false`. If conversely `f1 == f2` were to evaluate to `true`, then this leads to the question of determining whether two callable will have the same side effects and evaluate to the same value for all inputs, which is not possible to reliably determine. Therefore, if we would like to be able to replace `f1` with `f2`, we can't allow equality comparisons for callables.  

# Quantitative Comparison

The operators less-than (`<`), less-than-or-equal (`<=`), greater-than (`>`), and greater-than-or-equal (`>=`) define quantitative comparisons. They can only be applied to data types that support such comparisons. As of the time of writing, these are the same data types that can also support arithmetics.
